[Music]
ladies and gentlemen
your attention please all right just
listen up
the guinness world records award for the
deepest human invasion into the earth's
crust
goes to the cola super deep borehole
its depth is 7.4 miles you can find it
in the icy part of russia
where the winter temperature of minus 40
degrees fahrenheit is a common thing
while that's chilling global scientists
started to dig it in the 1970s
the grand plan was to reach a depth of
9.3 miles
it was a purely scientific project to
study the earth's crust
and maybe get to the hot mantle well
when it's so cold outside
it kind of makes sense up to the depth
of 4.3 miles
the drill easily coped with granite rock
then
denser layers came and broke the drill
the scientists had to change the
drilling pattern
in the end it resembled a tree with many
branches
the deeper it went the hotter it became
the temperature went up to 350 degrees
the equipment was constantly out of
order and work was stopped completely in
1992.
if you see this legendary place with
your own eyes you'd hardly realize
there's an abyss
right beneath your feet the borehole
looks like a rather small
and unambitious hole in the ground the
place is now abandoned
overgrown with moss and rust it has its
fair share of myths surrounding it too
one of them says people hear strange
sounds like moans and screams from the
death
in reality of course none of this is
true
at the time many countries were engaged
in the study of the earth's crust
for example germany they duly noted the
experience of the cola borehole
and made a supertech drill that could
withstand extreme temperatures
a location was chosen in bavaria at the
junction of two tectonic plates
in the past they were the shores of an
ancient ocean
in the early 90s a group of researchers
began drilling a well there
but already at a depth of four miles the
earth fought back
it deflected the drill from the vertical
and then the temperature made a surprise
spike to 520 degrees
all these problems forced scientists to
stop at a depth of 5.6 miles
in 1977 a company in austria started
drilling a well at a site with plentiful
resources
or so they thought they did find large
gas reserves
but there was an unexpected problem as
the drill
entered the chamber the well collapsed
they tried again and made a new
even bigger borehole that went as deep
as 5.3 miles
but ironically they weren't able to
drill into the gas chamber again
in sweden expectations from drilling
weren't met
either at the site of a huge crater 30
miles in diameter
they started the search for gas and oil
it's the largest crater in europe
which must have appeared because of a
meteorite the well
went deep but unfortunately nothing of
interest was found
at four miles down the drilling stopped
one of the deepest oil wells in the
world is bertha rogers in
oklahoma its depth is almost six miles
in 1974 the lone star company achieved
such a stunning result in just over
500 days for five years it was the
deepest borehole in the world
until the cola super deep was drilled
bertha rogers could probably have gone
even deeper
but the drill suddenly struck a molten
sulfur deposit
it grew solid around the drill string
breaking the rig
if you can't get to the earth's mantle
from the ground do it from the water
project moho was just about that it got
its name from moho
the threshold between crust and mantle
and well
a hole you know moho well anyway
the project was launched in the 1960s
and was overseen by the u.s
national science foundation the crust on
the ocean floor
is thinner than on land and the mantle
is closer
scientists had hope that a three-mile
deep underwater borehole
would bring them there they chose a
location in the pacific ocean
where the bottom was at a depth of about
two miles
there were two phases planned for the
project and the first was a success
a total of five wells were drilled each
not exceeding 600 feet in depth
unfortunately the second phase never
happened
too many problems were involved so
apparently
there ain't no mojo um holes
today underwater wells are commonplace
their main purpose is extraction of oil
and gas
the eva 4000 american drilling platform
is located in the gulf of mexico this
huge structure
rises above the water at a height of a
20-story building
the platform moves around looking for
oil at depths of over six thousand feet
and when it finds a good spot it's
capable of drilling
up to six miles into the seabed now
let's move to africa here at the very
south of the continent
there's a huge quarry the kimberley
diamond mod
now it's easy to drill through the
ground when you have the best equipment
but this hole was literally dug by hand
about
50 000 workers dug it tirelessly in the
late 19 and early 20th centuries
using ordinary shovels and no they
hardly wanted to get to the opposite
side of the earth
they were attracted by the enchanting
brilliance of diamonds
one of the most famous precious stones
tiffany
weighing 128.5 carats was found in the
kimberley mine
the depth of the hole reached 790 feet
just imagine how difficult it was to
return from work
it was like climbing 66 floors on foot
when the work stopped the bottom of the
pit was partially filled with
soil and then water flooded the place
today
it's a popular site among tourists and
surely
each of them secretly hopes to find a
diamond there
with the industrial boom oil became even
more popular than diamonds
and the oil wells around the world are
getting deeper
for example in 2008 qatar drilled the
longest oil well at that time
el shahid it was 7.6 miles long
and it only took them a little over a
month the vertical part of the shaft
reaches 6.7 miles
stretched up instead of down the shaft
would reach the height of commercial
airplane flights
the record was broken in 2012 by the z44
chavo oil well when they measured its
length
the new hole beat the one in qatar by
about 300 feet
just for a clearer picture either of
these two oil wells would fit almost
15 burj khalifa's or 40 eiffel towers
moving on to canada and high up into the
sky to look at it from space
see those two huge holes if you don't
know
those are diamond mining sites you might
think that an
alien invasion happened while you slept
right through
this enormous place is on the island of
lac de gras
not far from the arctic circle this is a
whole city with industrial and
administrative buildings
a boiler house living quarters for
workers and
even an airstrip in 2018 the largest
diamond in north america was found here
it weighed 552 carats
apart from diamonds and oil the bowels
of the earth
have a lot of other useful stuff one
example is copper
let's go to utah and see the giant
bingham canyon mine
copper has been mined here for over a
century the width of this quarry reaches
2.5 miles
and it goes half a mile down just
imagine how breathtaking a paragliding
flight would be
over this powerful structure but the
greatest treasure of the planet is of
course
fresh water and to get to it people
would dig as deep as they have to
the deepest water well in the world is
found in great britain
it was dug by hand in the 19th century
people just had to keep on digging
because they couldn't get to water and
as a result they reached almost
1300 feet when the water finally gushed
from under the ground
the workers barely managed to escape
from the well
many of us spend a huge part of our life
under the ground
yeah i mean the subway the deepest
underground station in the world is in
kiev ukraine
it takes over five minutes for the
escalator to lower you to the platform
after all you're traveling nearly 350
feet down
sometimes nature decides to dig
something deep on its own
most likely the mariana trench is the
deepest point in the ocean
its bottom called the challenger deep is
6.8 miles below
sea level sunlight never gets there the
pressure down below is more than a
thousand times higher than on the
surface
if you decide to dive to the bottom
you'll spend four hours of your time
and a whole lot of money on the
necessary equipment
scientists have even found mountains
there by the way
if everest was moved to the bottom of
the mariana trench
we wouldn't be able to see its top on
the surface
a little riddle can you dig water the
answer is yes
if it's in the form of ice the urine
observatory in antarctica made it by
digging bore holes
up to one and a half miles deep using
hot water
optical detector filaments pass through
them they capture elementary particles
neurons in fact this is a telescope
that's directed not
upwards but downwards into the eyes but
that's a completely different story